---
title: transness and philosophy are not exclusive concepts
title-prefix: somas.is/notes
description: |
    some thoughts about how philosophy and trans identities interact.
author: Kylie McClain
date: 2019-11-14
breadcrumbs: |
    [notes](notes.html)
lang: en-US
---

In class this afternoon, I began to realize these thoughts and wrote
them down frantically into my notebook, because something was bothering
me that I couldn't quite grasp fully. We were discussing Stoicism, but
in particular, [Marcus Aurelius' Meditations](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2680). Discussing the use
of nature in it, my professor started to speak of Aurelius\' ideas of
nature. Our class was taking issue with nature and naturalism's current
through Stoicism, which really ended up being more a current through
Greek and Roman philosophy anyway.

She was saying he may consider nature's good as more of a
"goal-oriented" good; that is, the tree has a goal: to grow, flourish,
reproduce, and so on. However, she then went on to say that that is
good. Our previous class was critical of the way that nature was
utilized and taken as a good, and that the universe is good
intrinsically.

Nature as a goal-oriented thing tending towards good is a troubling
prospect to me however, because in my experience of what people assert
as nature, people (transphobes, well meaning cis people, and an
unfortunately numerable amount of trans people) see the assigned sex at
birth as being nature; gender
{identity,presentation,expression,conception} is put upon it by the
self. That's where the refrain that trans existence is unnatural comes
from.

There's multiple ways to view this: gender as part of nature, identity
as nature, identity as social, gender as social, gender as choice, ...â€‹,
and many many other ways. My list is lacking nuance and depth, but for
the sake of simplicity I'll say that it's not something I think much of
currently and that I'm not firmly in any camp either. For me, gender is
just something I have and I think the nature/nurture dichotomy is
bullshit. Nature and nurture are intrinsically linked and I think
dividing them is a mistake, much like Descartes divided the mind and
body, leaving us to pick up the pieces with phenomenology. I digress.

How do I reconcile putting my experiences onto ancient philosophy? They
were so unprepared for trans lives, but even I know that's a lie. Trans
people existed then, we always have, and philosophers claiming to speak
for the entire breadth of human experience never cared about what we
have to bring to the dialogue. Thus, I feel unwelcome to apply my
experiences openly in class and to these texts; though I know my
identity is not a recent invention, I feel ignored and underappreciated
for what my experience with gender and sexuality have to add.

Part of my hesitancy could be the makeup of the class. An LGBTQ+ studies
class of course, opens up more opportunities for an atmospherically
comforting way of speaking trans experiences (well, one would hope at
least). But that's bullshit too isn't it? I know a few trans people in
ancient philosophy, I'm the only trans feminine person in my LGBTQ+
studies class. Why does one present more opportunity than the other,
when I see all these opportunities slowly driving past me as I listen to
the class talk without speaking up once?

This is part of a greater narrative I have, but no one ever seems to
agree when I say that gender studies and philosophy are actually the
same study.

I think it is incomplete, when one discusses identity, change, nature,
and human experience when one does not include the breadth of trans
experience. These perspectives are valuable to an enormous extent when
studying this philosophy, and ancient, modern, recent, continental, all
philosophy can not and will never claim to speak to human experience if
it leaves trans perspectives of philosophy out in the cold. And, it is a
mistake to not utilize that in critical, truly analyzing discussions and
lessons.
