---
description: in defense of plain text and chat logs.
title: memory fades but our words are forever
title-prefix: somas.is/notes
author: Kylie McClain
date: 2020-02-11
breadcrumbs: |
    [notes](notes.html)
lang: en-US
---

Talking with Violet tonight I realized how scary things are sometimes.
I've spent the greater portion of my life talking to people online. I've
been on IRC since I was 10, younger than anyone really should be, and
I've been using Discord for a few years now. IRC is a plain text
protocol, you keep the logs and it isn't really the responsibility of
anyone else.

Had I been better with keeping archives and placing value on things like
that, I might have logs from long ago. There are friends who I only knew
on IRC, and this being prior to the lack of anonymity we've accepted in
our social networks, I actually don't know any of their names. There's a
small selection of people who I've kept up in other ways, because as
luck would have it I'd run into them again somewhere and know for sure
it was them. What about those who I do not remember anymore, who no
longer seem to coalesce where I did? The memory of them has become
blurry and obscured as I've gotten older and realized how many years
depression, social ostracization, and gender dysphoria took from me.

I was cleaning out my Dropbox account a few months ago when I found
three screenshots of my desktop from around 2011. They are the earliest
pictures I have of things I did on the computer that I remember taking.
In one screenshot, there was an XChat window with me and a friend
talking in a channel we founded together, to work on fun stuff for the
Nintendo DSi's web browser. What happened to the screenshots, and why am
I not posting them here? Because past me deleted them. I thought I
should move on, and I didn't have the IRC logs of the conversations I
had with that person anymore. That was a (looking back now, ironic)
choice I made for myself.

I met Violet on Tumblr, I knew her there for years and years, and we
started talking more after we both were on a Discord server dedicated to
a favorite music artist. Had I not chosen to talk more to her, I would
not have started hormone therapy and escaped the clutches of depression,
I would not have traveled out of the country for the first time in my
life, and I would be a much lonelier person. What does this have to do
with anything else mentioned here?

At the time I'm writing this, we have sent 330,097 direct messages back
and forth since January 13th, 2017. The first things said were \"Hi\"
(from her), and then \"🐱 cat\" (from me). She had a cat as her avatar
at the time. (she told me this while reading this post, because I didn't
remember this anymore, and only her current avatar on Discord shows for
all of her messages, which is no longer a cat) We talk just about every
single day and if I had the message data myself I'd be interested in
finding the days in which we did not talk.

The me that sent that reply is an unrecognizably different person than
who I am now; stays in her room, lives with her parents, has a tenuous
relationship with anyone at school and anyone her age. I now live two
and a half hours from my parents in the mountains of North Carolina with
three other roommates, one of which is my other girlfriend, Cassie; did
I mention I'm polyamorous now? I talk to my mom almost every day even if
I have nothing to say, people at work seem to think I'm a normal human
being. I have changed.

I'm rambling again. When me and Violet are together, our chat goes
quiet. If one were to look at our chat history they might think
something had happened for a month of my life, to cause me to not really
say much at all to her and vice versa. It scares me for a very
irrational reason: a stunning amount of my life has changed purely
through a single chat window I've had on my computer for multiple years.
I have no logs of it; I am purely going on the grace of Discord, that
they will not suddenly disappear one day and take all of our words with
it. Is Discord profitable? It won't stay profitable. No proprietary chat
solution has ever stayed profitable. It too, will fall.

When GDPR came into effect, Discord suddenly started allowing people to
download their data in a huge, unmaintainable and irritating archive of
data, that, if memory serves (it doesn't!), only even contains *your*
side of all conversations. This makes sense from a legal standpoint, but
they are therefore the most useless conversation logs ever because of
it. There are other archiving mechanisms:
[`pullcord`](https://github.com/tsudoko/pullcord), and [Discord History
Tracker](https://dht.chylex.com). These solutions work to actually
create logs of your chats, rather than just giving you all your data and
forgetting a conversation isn't one-sided. Discord History Tracker
actually is just a script on top of the Discord client itself that uses
the client's own mechanisms to download all the messages it can. It is a
cumbersome and slow method, and it will take a very long time to
download everything, but it is the safest and least easily bannable
method of archiving your chats. It does not archive anything that is not
a text message. Message attachments are only left in as URLs to their
location on `cdn.discordapp.com`. `pullcord` downloads *everything*:
custom emojis, all shared files/images, every server and channel and
direct message your account can access, it will download. It also comes
with a disclaimer on the readme that your account could get banned,
because it's using an unofficial Discord client to interface with a
standard Discord user account, rather than a bot account.

[Discord's ToS](https://discordapp.com/terms) does not allow this. They
instead include gems such as:

> You agree not to (and not to attempt to) (i) use the Service for any
> use or purpose other than as expressly permitted by these Terms; (ii)
> copy, adapt, modify, prepare derivative works based upon, distribute,
> license, sell, transfer, publicly display, publicly perform, transmit,
> stream, broadcast, *attempt to discover any source code, reverse
> engineer*, decompile, disassemble, or otherwise exploit the Service or
> any portion of the Service, except as expressly permitted in these
> Terms; or (iii) *use data mining, robots, spiders, or similar data
> gathering and extraction tools on the Service*. No licenses or rights
> are granted to you by implication or otherwise under any intellectual
> property rights owned or controlled by the Company or its licensors,
> except for the permissions and rights expressly granted in these
> Terms.

Emphasis mine.

So when we are together, and our chat goes quiet, I feel a pit in
stomach in an indescribable way sometimes. I'm with her, I'm happy, but
the entire method and medium with which we talk has lost that relatively
concrete property. The memories I have of our conversations in person
will fade, and whenever I finally start to live with her, the writing of
this post will be such a distant memory that I will likely not remember
what exactly the conversation that prompted this was.

The years I have forgotten have left a hole that I can not entirely
account for in my own history, and I can only hope that as time goes on
and I have other to fill in the gaps, it might gain more clarity as
years go by; but it could just as easily continue to disappear, and I
sure have let it do so. I can not index and search through the words
I've said in the bed before falling asleep.

Where am I going with this? It is the responsibility of any
communication protocol to not do this shit. Be gentle with your users;
be gentle with their conversations and value what they say. I could
almost excuse Discord's \"no data gathering and extraction tools\" rule,
if they provided a local logging mechanism of some sort, but they do
not. I am, additionally, learning that perhaps this is simply a thing I
will need to learn to become easy with. Normally I am a very easy going
person, willing to throw away the concrete and the permanent when it
seems bothersome and constricting. Do I need to let go of this
concreteness, and accept that *all conversations are ephemeral by their
very nature*? Maybe I do, and perhaps I should also spend less time on
the computer.

With IRC, at least you knew what you were getting into. It is ephemeral
in a way Snapchat can only dream to be, because it only serves to repeat
what was sent to it to anyone who happens to be listening. So if you
wanted to have history, you'd keep logs, and if you really valued it
you'd keep them for as long as you could. If you didn't have them, maybe
you could ask someone else in the channel? Or perhaps your IRC bouncer
has been keeping logs for years while you've been barely checking a
channel.

This is something that every chat service in existence today seems to
throw to the wayside. Logs become the responsibility of the service
provider, and the service provider isn't very sentimental about the
first time you told her you loved her, or the long nights you stayed up
talking, or the fact that you called your chat's pinned messages \"the
fridge\" because you thought it was cute. The purpose is to provide that
service of history, it is not to create ownership or identification with
that history. Any chat service that provides archive downloading might
only provide the messages you sent, which is a thing that makes legal
sense, but not human sense.

The thought of running `pullcord` on a cronjob and having a consistent
and up-to-date copy of all the conversations I've had on Discord sounds
so nice. I'm afraid though that the amount of data I would download
would get me noticed and banned though, and being banned is scary. I'd
have the archives, but they're only facsimiles, they're not the chat
window where I had all these memories in.

I'm not sure how to finish this but if anything, consider this a plea to
all chat services to at the very least provide local logging, or at
least allow me to use a utility like `pullcord` without issue. I have
lost enough. I am confronted with the inevitability that my memories of
the good times I have had will fade away in a more secret and quiet way
than the bad memories have, and I want to at least put up a fight.
