---
title: music making tools
description: an overview of the software and hardware I use for making
  music

author: Kylie McClain
date: 2020-12-05
breadcrumbs: <br/><a href='notes.html'>notes</a>
lang: en-US
---

[I make music](https://somasis.bandcamp.com/). I think that even makes
me a *musician™*. So, I thought I'd make a post about the tools I use to
make music. Occasionally I'm asked, and usually it means I have to go
retracing the steps I took to get a hold of the things I use, so it
might be worth it to write down these things for the future.

Just for the record: there's obviously no sponsorship here, this is my
genuine thoughts on the things I use. I'm not trying to shill for any
company, and if I were, there'd be a disclaimer. That said...​ I'd always
be down for free hardware and software in exchange for an honest review.
But this isn't that.

First off, as of writing this I produce music on [Arch
Linux](https://archlinux.org). People find tend to find this surprising
when I tell them I don't produce on Windows or macOS, so I figure it's
the first thing I should get out the way.

I don't actually use Linux-specific tools, though it'd be nice if audio
producing on Linux could catch up to the standards of software that's on
Windows and macOS. I almost exclusively use tools made for Windows,
running under [WINE](https://www.winehq.org/). It works surprisingly
well, though sometimes tools can be a bit more unstable than they might
be on Windows. Sometimes, things even run faster than on Windows.

## digital audio workstations {#_digital_audio_workstations}

I exclusively use [FL Studio](https://www.image-line.com/fl-studio/).
I've been producing with it since 2013. I only really have felt
proficient in it since 2018, though. Always learning something new (this
is a sign it does too much).

There's probably more efficient software I could be using, or some DAW
that matches up more with the kind of music I make, but over the years
I've grown to enjoy using FL quite a lot, and despite how bloated it is,
it gets the job done and doesn't try to be too overbearing, or end up
confusing me.

Prior to FL Studio (so, 2012-2013), I played around
[Renoise](https://www.renoise.com/) some, as I had heard some of my
favorite breakcore artists at the time (namely Venetian Snares) were
heavy users of it and trackers like it. However, I found the interface
too confusing and haven't ever bothered to go back and reevaluate it.
Apparently it is quite good for music that can use a lot of manual
sequencing though, like breakcore.

## hardware {#_hardware}

I don't use hardware unless it's really necessary (no money). Most of
the hardware I do have was gifted to me.


[Audio Technica ATH-M40x Professional Monitor Headphones](https://www.audio-technica.com/en-us/ath-m40x)

:   I think these are seen as meme headphones or whatever nowadays by
    lots of people, but they're very popular for good reason. These are
    easily the most affordable, well-built, and just plain good for the
    price headphones you could possibly get for music production. The
    frequency response is tuned very flat, I listen to and mix all my
    music on these headphones, I'm very happy with them.

    ::: paragraph
    I will say, and I think this is a technique issue of mine more than
    an issue with the headphones, I think I have a tendency to mix my
    bass a bit too loud sometimes. I don't do enough car tests, don't
    test on lower-quality/more common headphones enough, but perhaps the
    bass on these headphones could be a bit louder. I genuinely can't
    tell if it's a technique issue or an issue with the frequency
    response not being as flat as it sounds to me.
    :::

    ::: paragraph
    Bottom line: these are the best mixing and mastering headphones
    you'll get for 99\$ dollars.
    :::

[Audio Technica AT2020 Cardioid Condenser Microphone](https://www.audio-technica.com/en-us/at2020)

:   I use it for recording vocals. I also use it as a room microphone,
    for when I'm in calls with people nowadays. It's really just for
    vocals, but it's a great general-purpose microphone.

    ::: paragraph
    The part that is worth cringing over though is that I don't use any
    sort of pop filter, any sort of windguard, anything like that. I
    mostly rely on the silence of my room, recording late into the early
    morning.
    :::

    ::: paragraph
    I do a lot of editing to the things I record to clean up the raw
    audio, which is how I get by being this sloppy. Don't be like me.
    :::

[Behringer XENYX 302USB](https://www.behringer.com/product.html?modelCode=P0ADV)

:   ::: paragraph
    I use this with the aforementioned microphone for recording vocals.
    I also use it for digitally recording in vinyl records that I have.
    It is old and not a great mixer. It is just what I have.
    :::

    ::: paragraph
    I think I've heard that Behringer's been getting a lot of criticism
    lately, but I haven't kept up.
    :::

[YAMAHA PSR-E333 Portable Keyboard](https://asia-latinamerica-mea.yamaha.com/en/products/musical_instruments/keyboards/portable_keyboards/psr-e333/index.html)

:   I don't use it much, but if I ever feel like doing some MIDI
    keyboard stuff live, it's there. Please watch the introduction video
    on its product page. It's adorable.

Lastly, and don't get grossed out by this, but almost all of my songs as
of the past two years have used my phone's sound recorder app for vocals
in some way. Sometimes I have ideas when I'm in the shower and I have to
get them out or I'll die.

## software {#_software}

I use lots of software. For plugins, I tend to prefer ones that do one
thing well, which is usually how I like my software in general. One
thing well, and not particularly heavy in resource usage, which means
that I can chain them pretty heavily and without much trouble. I enjoy
chaining plugins to get the sounds I want, rather than just plugins that
have a magic knob on them that makes the sound, as it allows for more
fine-grained and particular control of what's actually done to the
audio.

I have a tendency to call my music shoegaze at times; this workflow is
part of why I call it that. It somewhat resembles the way that shoegaze
artists use lots and lots of guitar pedals.

Generally, I use lots of freeware plugins for getting the job done.
There are a few tools which are not free, but mainly because they're so
good that the free stuff doesn't really compare, yet.

Assume everything is free unless I say otherwise.

### general purpose {#_general_purpose}

- Default (non-free) FL Studio plugins. They do one thing well for the
  most part and they're relatively high quality.

- Graham Yeadon's [GVST](https://www.gvst.co.uk/) plugins.

  They're free, they're a great selection of various effects.
  Chorus, delays, gates, pitch correction (this was how I found it
  originally), just a really good set.

- [mda-vst](https://sourceforge.net/projects/mda-vst/) is a (probably
  somewhat well known) set of open-source (formerly [closed
  source](http://mda.smartelectronix.com/)) plugins. They're definitely
  getting a bit old, and I don't use them as much as I used to, but in a
  pinch I use SubSynth for adding some sub to vocals or drums that might
  need them. Additionally, it has a good [Shepard
  tone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shepard_tone) generator, a nice
  stereo splitter, and the degrade plugin is nice (though it has a
  really irritating issue of possibly corrupting your DAW's runtime
  memory if you start more than one instance of it, ouch).

- [TAL software](https://tal-software.com/)\'s free plugins are neat,
  though I notice they use a bit more CPU than it really seems like they
  should be using.

### audio editing {#_audio_editing}

I use audio editing tools quite a lot, and there's only really two
things I use to do it.

- I use [Edison](https://www.image-line.com/fl-studio/plugins/edison/),
  a non-free FL Studio plugin for most of my editing work. It integrates
  really nice with FL's workflow, and I like it.

- For audio restoration, I use [iZotope
  RX](https://www.izotope.com/en/products/rx.html). It is paid, and it
  seems unlikely any free software solution is going to match it any
  time soon. I use it sometimes for cleaning up poorly recorded vocals,
  for cleaning up vinyl recordings, and for weirder types of audio
  manipulation in general. Hilariously overpriced.

### mixing, mastering {#_mixing_mastering}

The line between distortion and mixing can be pretty fuzzy at times, so
these go for both.

- I use
  [Maximus](https://www.image-line.com/fl-studio/plugins/maximus/), a
  non-free default FL Studio plugin on the master track of all my songs.
  Some people say not to use a master limiter, I do because it actually
  makes clipping more obvious to my ears.

- FL Studio versions 12.3.1 and up have a nice [Transient
  Processor](https://www.image-line.com/fl-studio/plugins/transient-processor/)
  plugin that can be nice for making vocals and drums more snappy
  sometimes.

- The Crosstalk2 plugin, by [Sleepy-Time
  DSP](https://bedroomproducersblog.com/2014/09/20/sleepy-time-dsp/). It
  tries to emulate the crosstalk effect that can happen with analog
  recordings. It's probably snake oil---​I use it anyway because it makes
  the tracks sound *worse*. In more concrete analysis, it does seem to
  add a nice high end to things, and I at least think that makes it
  sound a little better. It's definitely a subtle change, though.

- [CHOW Tape Model](https://github.com/jatinchowdhury18/AnalogTapeModel)
  is a really excellent, free software plugin based on a physical model
  of an analog tape machine, originally based on the Sony TC-260. It's
  really nice and underrated, I've been using it a lot as of late quite
  happily. I used it on [elk knob, the leaves were
  turning](https://somasis.bandcamp.com/track/elk-knob-the-leaves-were-turning)
  and I think it really helped to give it a nice, analog sound.

### vocal manipulation {#_vocal_manipulation}

- I use
  [NewTone](https://www.image-line.com/fl-studio/plugins/NewTone/),
  another (non-free) default FL plugin, for pitch tweaking. I use this
  on my vocals often, though mostly because I haven't gotten good enough
  at singing to hold all the notes I want to hold as stable as I would
  like. It's good though.

- Graham Yeadon's [GSnap](https://www.gvst.co.uk/gsnap.htm) plugin. I
  started using this when I first started doing vocals, but I don't use
  it *that* much nowadays, mostly because my own singing technique has
  improved enough that it's not really necessary anymore.

- Graham Yeadon's [GForm](https://www.gvst.co.uk/beta.htm) plugin. A
  cool vocal pitch and formant shifter, I've used it quite a lot. If you
  use it lightly and don't mix it to be the main output on a vocal
  track, it can help to bring out some of the higher or lower qualities
  of your voice in a way that is hard to emulate when actually singing.

### distortion, pitch and time manipulation, glitching, degradation {#_distortion_pitch_and_time_manipulation_glitching_degradation}

- [Destroy FX's plugins](http://destroyfx.org/). Scrubby is a nice
  plugin for time and pitch manipulation, and just in general for
  creating glitchy sounds. Transverb is also pretty cool. Actually, all
  of their plugins are pretty cool. Just check them all out.

- [Magnus\' plugins](http://magnus.smartelectronix.com/). Ambience is a
  nice reverb plugin, I also quite like the fact that it has a hold
  button, to actually hold the wet signal, and prevent the reverb from
  decaying further until you deactivate the button. Really cool
  function, I wish more reverb plugins had that.

- [Bram's plugins](http://bram.smartelectronix.com/plugins.php). Bouncy
  is a pretty cool plugin, but my favorites are [Crazy
  Ivan](http://bram.smartelectronix.com/plugins.php?id=7), which is
  another sort of pitch shifter/time manipulation/distortion plugin,
  [SupaTrigga](http://bram.smartelectronix.com/plugins.php?id=6), which
  is a sort of automatic beat slicer.

- [LameVST](https://github.com/Iunusov/LameVST) is an open-source plugin
  that does MP3 compression as an effect. I don't use it often, and it
  causes a significant delay on playback, both realtime and on rendering
  tracks, but it can be cool to use sometimes.

### synthesizers {#_synthesizers}

- Lots of non-free default FL studio plugins. I don't care. 3xOsc is
  *God's synthesizer*. I also really like using Fruity DX10.

## sampling {#_sampling}

My music is very sample-heavy. Manipulating samples is much more fun
than synthesizing, to me. Something that surprises some people is that I
generally do not use sample packs. For the most part, everything I
sample is something that I got myself in some form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

That's basically everything I can think to mention right now. Hopefully,
this provides some insight into how I work on things without giving the
secret sauce away...​ :)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**edit 2020-12-07**: Added the headphones I use and a note signifying
that this isn't a sponsorship of any sort, just in case it comes off
like that.
