---
title: therapy sessions in assigned reading responses
description: a compilation of responses I gave in gender studies classes
date: 2021-04-06
aliases:
  - /note-2021-04-06.html
---

I seem to keep allowing my gender studies professors to become part-time
therapists. probably not a great thing; however, in my defense,
reflection is therapy and they're asking for reflection. sometimes I
feel a little proud of what I wrote, perhaps because the things I read
helped me to work through some of the things troubling me. so, I figure
it could be worth sharing.

## androgyny as a solution

[The Transgender Alternative (1991)]: http://web.archive.org/web/20250517001242/http://dallasdenny.com/Chrysalis/2013/12/14/cq-flashback-1991/

> So what does androgyny have to do with transgenderism? Any person,
> mainstream and not particularly gender-conflicted, can opt for
> androgyny. Yet those of us who don't fit that description, who may
> still yearn to cross over, if only to return to a balanced state, need
> to examine our options. Crossdressing may be a bold beginning (perhaps
> an end in itself), but nonetheless offers the potential for
> integration and wholeness. Transsexualism, while perfectly appropriate
> for some, may often be more of an overstated resolution-indeed, a form
> of escape. Trading one set of stereotypic gender restrictions for
> another is a denial of wholeness, unless one simply feels more
> centered in the gender of choice (given this culture), hence more able
> to strive for wholeness in that form. However, other transsexual
> people who may never realistically \"pass\" in society might find
> greater solace through androgyny.

--- Holly Boswell, [The Transgender Alternative (1991)]

\[context: Holly Boswell is from Asheville, NC, she died a few years
back. created the transgender symbol ⚧️. this article in particular, is
notable for being one of the most notable early uses of the word
\"transgender\", coining it, though the meaning has changed.\]

I found myself disagreeing with this article's characterization of
\"transgender\", though I guess that's mostly a generational thing. \[in
short: the characterization is that \"transgender\" as a concept
intertwines with androgyny as a way to strike a middle ground between
crossdressing and transsexualism\] For me prior to transitioning, I'd
never considered crossdressing, I was actually more content with being
seen as a \"tomboy\" perhaps (or perhaps, crossdressing as a concept was
just too rife with eroticization that I just didn't even want to
consider it). And with transsexualism's medicalized description, I never
really found myself in that either, in part because surgeries in general
tend to scare me a bit. For me, hormones were a big deal and that was
the thing I was most certain about, surgeries were too vague in terms of
what they could do, they seemed too instantaneous (at the time) compared
to hormones bringing out features in me that were already there, just
not emphasized the same way.

I think to some extent, my disagreement of what these two poles are in
relation to \"transgender\", with \"transgender\" being a sort of
androgynous alternative to the two is because of my own discomfort with
my own androgyny. For example, when I think about my own problems in
this time in my life as a 22 year old trans woman, my problems aren't
really about gender roles or feeling restricted by them. In fact I'd say
they tend to be more about my androgyny holding me back from my ideal
self. Not being raised with experience in things like fashion, makeup,
\"typical\" girl things, being passed down to me by my mom and the other
girl friends I perhaps would have had, is what tends to bother me more.
While that lack of experience being given to me can easily (and should)
be attributed to gender roles, the point stands nonetheless that
androgyny isn't really what I'm comfortable in, it's just what has ended
up being the deck I've been dealt that I feel I need to work out of.

Back to the quote, that's basically what bothers me about it. \'Other
transsexuals who may never realistically \"pass\" in society might find
greater solace through androgyny\' probably sounds fine, but perhaps a
chip on my shoulder is what keeps me from being content with it. I think
the usage of \"realistically\" there is a little misplaced, and I'd say
that at least coming from an opposing life experience, androgyny's
definitely not giving me solace. Just complacency.

### response

my professor had a nice response to this. I probably shouldn't copy them
verbatim just out of respect to this being a private exchange between
professor/student, but I'll at least paraphrase.

essentially, when this is being responded to, 2021, a lot of the
premises in this article (which _is_ definitely worth reading) have
changed to some degree. passing nowadays is not _the_ major life goal of
trans people, and this article really presupposes that a transsexual's
life is one which is bound up mostly in the ordeal of passing.

my professor agrees that this should be a troubling thing to read as
being centered even as it's being decentered, but these alternatives she
brings up are essentially products of that era. it is useful to
recognize the real problem of the cis gaze that lies at the core of
passing as a trans person's ultimate goal.

## t4t relationships / recognition through the other

> The result is that for most men their biggest enemy is their own inner
> femininity because its discovery would destroy them in the eyes of
> other men. It is well known that men do not develop physically close
> relationships with other men as women do with other women. Men do not
> show emotions such as hurt, grief, fear, or tenderness lest such
> manifestations shall be taken as a sign of weakness---​read femininity.
> Thus men always keep other men at a physical and psychological
> distance just as a moat around a castle keeps the enemy out. This is
> done because should the invader get inside the moat he might destroy
> the castle's owner. Should another man manage to penetrate a man's
> psychological defenses he might, just might discover something about
> that man which could be interpreted as not sufficiently masculine,
> which is to say, somewhat feminine. That information in the hands of
> another man would about destroy the victim's self esteem. You all
> understand what I'm talking about because you have gone to great
> lengths to keep your cross-dressing secret from brother, father,
> coach, boss, and friends lest they decide that you were indeed too
> feminine and not a REAL MAN. Have you ever reflected on the fact that
> you can hold hands, hug or give a hello or goodbye kiss to another CD
> if you were both dressed, whereas you would not think of doing the
> same thing if you were both dressed in men's clothes? That is because
> you have escaped FROM those masculine expectations and requirements
> when you are dressed as a woman. But unknowingly you behave that way
> when dressed because you CAN behave that way. It's a touch of freedom.

--- Dr. Virginia Prince\
speech delivered at the IFGE \"Coming Together Convention\" in Chicago,
March 7th, 1987; page 10, _[\"Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow -or- Where
We Were, Where We Are, Where We Might Go in the
Future\"](https://www.digitaltransgenderarchive.net/files/j098zb17n)_.

I think this paragraph really foreshadows some people (including
myself)\'s experiences on relationships between transgender people
(which I'll just call t4t from here on because I've always thought
that's a cute term).

Often something that comes out in t4t relationships is a sense of
openness and understanding that isn't always apparent with relationships
between a trans person and a cis person, because there's that shared
background that otherwise wouldn't exist. Of course, there's also some
opportunity for shared trauma and an inability to foil it when you are
too affected by it, but overall, there's definitely a positive aspect
that arises from that shared history.

I think some people get the impression that trans people only wish to
seek out relationships with cis people, but that's certainly not the
case. That perception also has a way of prioritizing cis people at the
top again, so that we can seem, to them, reliant on them for those basic
social and emotional needs. I feel that in my saying this, there's tones
of trans separatism here, but my point is instead to show that trans
people are strong, and while our communal bonds can have their difficult
points, they also have a beauty in our ability to rely one each other.

I think this is something that exists in every marginalized community
really, there's a perception to the white/cis/straight majority that
there's some need for us to rely on them for some need or another, so
there's not as much of a threat. \"Well, you can't live without us, so
we can be as uncaring and ignorant to your issues as we wish.\"

The paragraph really does foreshadow these lines of thought though, even
if it's not the point that was trying to be made, it's effectively the
same: recognition through the other is a hugely transformative
experience, and that can be translated into point of liberation not just
for you and that person, not just for your community, but societal
liberation as well. But it has to start with that individual, shared,
and then communal strength, I think.

## jokes / silence

> Each joke levels us a little more, and we sit silently\-- sometimes
> join in the laughter, as if deep down, we, too, believe we are the
> lowest among the low. No one will redeem your name, your love, your
> life, your manhood, but you. No one will save you, but you. Your
> silence is costing. Your silence is suicide.

--- [Tongues Untied](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tongues_Untied) (1989)

This was a simply amazing film. I wish I could point back at so many
different parts of this film, but it was just, amazing, and I must pick
just one. The way that silence reprises throughout Tongues Untied is
amazing: silence infects every part of our lives when we use it. \"I
cannot go home as who I am, and that hurts me deeply\", silence in the
way we live, silence in our presence in the world, silence in
expression. It is difficult to just pick one part of this film that I
felt and speak to that alone. Even though it is a film about the
experiences of Black gay men, it is hard to for me to not recognize the
universalities.

I find myself confronting silence often, be it through the words I
choose and do not choose to describe the relationships I hold, through
the people I tell and do not tell about my own feelings. Part of the way
it sticks with me is the everyday sacrifices I make\-- which one of my
lovers do I describe as my girlfriend to this person, which relationship
do I have to momentarily hide so as to avoid the inquisition? When I
speak on the phone while calling up someone for a new apartment and I
don't try and put on a voice, and they ask if my other roommates, are
they also guys?, what silence am I accepting there with whatever
response I give?

Often I find myself thinking, \"I want to go home\". I think this film,
this part in particular, really gives me something to point to; I can
recall thinking this when I was younger, I can recall thinking it a day
ago. Home as a concept has the underrated aspect of being a place of
self, and a place of security in that expression of self. What one lacks
in security with regard to their expression at home, one lacks in the
feeling of having home. I can be myself at home, but can I be my
complete self? Do I obscure things about myself for the sake of not
causing arguments? (of course I do)

I know plenty of older people who would take this a more simplistic way.
Even if they do not admit it, they too hide things from people in their
lives. But it doesn't feel good. Hiding one thing or another is fine,
hiding things because you're a teenager and you're exploring the world
and honing your conscience, sure. Hiding relationships from your family
members feels less good. But don't equivocate the two, one is a thing of
growth and the other can just kill your ability to be real with people
you care about. The point is made.

I found this film to be very enlightening and eyeopening for my own
introspection and I am very grateful for it being assigned.

## anxiety from wearing clothes that look fine on me

> But once AIDS has settled in the community and profoundly modified the
> way the gay male body is viewed, it is easily understandable that what
> is at stake is fear. The object of this fear is stigmatization, of
> course, but it goes beyond that, as Feinberg's last remark shows:
> \"Everyone had a good ten pounds to spare, as if ten pounds could
> protect one from death\". Fear is not triggered by other people's
> eyes, but by one's own eyes on one's own body.

--- Christelle Klein-Scholz -- [From the \"Homosexual Clone\" to the \"AIDS Clone\" (2014)](https://doi.org/10.4000/erea.4153)

This was such an interesting moment to read in this article.

In particular, \"fear is not triggered by other people's eyes, but by
one's own eyes on one's own body\". The way that bodies are viewed by
others is often the first thing that comes to mind when I think of my
own anxieties in public, as a mostly out trans woman. I know, in
reality, most people probably don't give me a second glance, there's a
good chance they mind their own business and don't care. But the fear
and anxiety comes from my own eyes on my own body. It's an anxiety that
comes from the idea, \"what if someone else sees what I think I'm seeing
about myself?\"

If one doesn't project confidence in the way they present themselves,
perhaps that insecurity could be seen by others, it becomes something to
prey upon. I'd just never seen that experience of anxiety from
visibility, pieced apart and redirected like that sentence did it.

## role inappropriateness / alienation of body from sexuality

> Among them was the determination of the permissible range of
> expressions of physical sexuality. This was a large gray area in the
> candidates\' self-presentations, because Benjamin's subjects did not
> talk about any erotic sense of their own bodies. Consequently nobody
> else who came to the clinics did either. By textual authority,
> physical men who lived as women and who identified themselves as
> transsexuals, as opposed to male transvestites for whom erotic penile
> sensation was permissible, could not experience penile pleasure. Into
> the 1980s there was not a single preoperative male-to-female
> transsexual for whom data was available who experienced genital sexual
> pleasure while living in the \"gender of choice.\" The prohibition
> continued postoperatively in interestingly transmuted form, and
> remained so absolute that no postoperative transsexual would admit to
> experiencing sexual pleasure through masturbation either. Full
> membership in the assigned gender was conferred by orgasm, real or
> faked, accomplished through heterosexual penetration. \"Wringing the
> turkey's neck,\" the ritual of penile masturbation just before
> surgery, was the most secret of secret traditions. To acknowledge so
> natural a desire would be to risk \"crash landing\"; that is, \"role
> inappropriateness\" leading to disqualification.
> --- Sandy Stone - The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto

I thought this section of the reading was so interesting. What was first
something that just seemed like a funny (if not somewhat uncomfortable)
offhand remark mentioned earlier in the essay, later becomes something
that basically explodes the entire premise of it all. I think what makes
me wonder the most though, is the feeling that this concept gave me,
actually. It does seem like a pragmatic thing, because it's like, that's
the last time you'd ever get a chance to do that, but the mere idea just
seems like such an odd idea I'm not sure I can really step in that frame
of mind. And, I'm gesturing around wringing the turkey's neck myself
because it even makes me uncomfortable.

But in that uncomfortability, I almost wonder if that's actually just me
being conditioned to not experience sexuality with regards to my body
the way that this article describes. If someone's ever asked about my
feelings about sex, I've basically maintained the same idea, that I've
not really had any sort of sexual connection to my body prior to
transitioning, but it makes me wonder if that's actually how I feel and
that it was an unhealthy and unenjoyable sexual relationship to myself,
or if it was just the sort of story I had to tell myself to make it
acceptable for me to exist as a trans woman, and as a trans girl, when I
was younger and closeted.

I'd never brought up my sexuality to the few therapists and
psychologists I've seen, because I probably had that same implicit
understanding that I needed to seem profoundly disconnected from myself,
and unhappy with that lack. These sorts of stories that we tell are
reenforced over and over again and eventually they can come to be a lie
that becomes the truth, which is also what is described in the [Lovelock
reading](https://doi.org/10.1080/09589236.2016.1155978) (at least, as I
understand it). I identified for a few years while closeted as asexual,
even, because that sort of connection, a sexual one, just seemed...​
alienating.

Nowadays things are different, and I think the relationship I have to my
body, despite my discomforts, is healthier. But, reevaluating those
formative years for my trans identity, it's lead me to wonder how many
of these discomforts are actually ones that I thought were ones I needed
to have, or if they were truly there. Or, does the distinction become
blurred after so long, and they're all just discomforts I have
regardless of if they were put upon me or not?

## closing

not really sure if this post makes sense to share. but I think the
content is interesting perhaps. I have no clue if this qualifies as
interesting stuff, nor do I want to write purely to show off interesting
stuff, but I don't want to just post my diary necessarily either.
